Updating profile & consensus docs (#75)
broadinstitute/lincs-cell-painting: profiles/README.md

2. Processed data for each Cell Painting plate (for several "data levels")
3. Instructions on how to reproduce the profiling pipeline

## Workflow 

![Cytominer workflow](media/cytominer_workflow_new.png)

## Pycytominer

> [Pycytominer](https://github.com/cytomining/pycytominer) is a code base built by @gwaygenomics and @niranjchandrasekaran. 

Reviewer: I guess you could say

```suggestion
[Pycytominer](https://github.com/cytomining/pycytominer) is a code base built by @gwaygenomics et al.
``` 

I don't think my contribution is significant enough to have my name appear here 🙂

It allows easy processing CellProfiler data and contains all functions that were used to create the data in this repository. Below, we describe the different steps of the pipeline. Please check the pycytominer repo for more details. 

> Part of the pipeline, from Level 3 to Level 4b, can be found in the [profile_cells](https://github.com/broadinstitute/lincs-cell-painting/blob/master/profiles/profile_cells.py) script and the final aggregation to the consensus data is found in this [notebook](https://github.com/broadinstitute/lincs-cell-painting/blob/master/consensus/build-consensus-signatures.ipynb).  

Reviewer: Do you think including the notebook that contains the code for sphering should also be mentioned here?

Reviewer 2: @michaelbornholdt - can you address this?

Author: I have

Note here that we do not include the intermediate step of generating `.sqlite` files per plate using a tool called [cytominer-database](https://github.com/cytomining/cytominer-database).
This repository and workflow begins after we applied cytominer-database.

### Aggregation

> The [aggregation method](https://github.com/cytomining/pycytominer/blob/master/pycytominer/aggregate.py) is used twice in the workflow. Firstly, the median of all cells within a well is aggregated to one profiler per well. The aggregation method doesn't persist the metadata which is why this step is followed by an annotation step to add the MOA data and others. 

Reviewer: I like the idea of thinking about creating the consensus profiles as another aggregation step. But given that you have a separate section for consensus below perhaps you could talk about aggregating 4b to consensus profiles in that section and not here.

Reviewer 2: @michaelbornholdt - can you address this?

Author: I have, there are two different sections now that explain aggregation and consensus.

Secondly, the normalized and feature selected data (4b) is aggregated via Median or MODZ to consensus data. This means that each of the five replicates are combined  to one profile representing one pertubation with a given dose.    

### Normalization
[Normalization](https://github.com/cytomining/pycytominer/blob/master/pycytominer/normalize.py) can be done via different methods and over all wells in a plate or only the negative controls (DMSOs). In this case, the `mad_robustize` method was used and both the output of the whole-plate and the DMSO normalization were saved in this repository. 
It is important to note that the normalization is done over each plate but not over the full batch.

### Spherizing

> [Spherizing](https://github.com/cytomining/pycytominer/blob/c0d3e86aa64de8b1c6c3213d48937aab8e9d1c1d/pycytominer/operations/transform.py#L13) (aka whitening) is a transformation of the data that tries to account for batch effects. Within Pycytominer, Spherizing is a method within the normalization function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Spherizing](https://github.com/cytomining/pycytominer/blob/c0d3e86aa64de8b1c6c3213d48937aab8e9d1c1d/pycytominer/operations/transform.py#L13) (aka whitening) is a transformation of the data that tries to correct batch effects. Within Pycytominer, Spherizing is a method within the normalization function.
```

Unlike the other normalizations, spherizing is done on the full batch (all plates). Check the code for details and relevant papers.

### Feature selection
The [feature_select](https://github.com/cytomining/pycytominer/blob/master/pycytominer/feature_select.py) method incorporates `["variance_threshold", "correlation_threshold", "drop_na_columns", "drop_outliers"]`. 

> These functions were developed to drop useless features and to improve post processing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These functions were developed to drop redundant and invariant features and to improve post processing.
```

2. Processed data for each Cell Painting plate (for several "data levels")
3. Instructions on how to reproduce the profiling pipeline

> ## Workflow 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Workflow
```

> ![Cytominer workflow](media/cytominer_workflow_new.png)

Reviewer 2: please overwrite the file `cytominer_workflow.png` instead of creating a new file.

Github version control will help us to recover the old one in the unlikely event we ever need to revert back.

> ## Pycytominer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Pycytominer

```

Need empty line after H2 headings

[Pycytominer](https://github.com/cytomining/pycytominer) is a code base built by @gwaygenomics et al.

> It allows easy processing CellProfiler data and contains all functions that were used to create the data in this repository. Below, we describe the different steps of the pipeline. Please check the pycytominer repo for more details. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It allows for easy processing of CellProfiler data and contains all functions that were used to create the data in this repository.
Below, we describe the different steps of the pipeline.
Please check the pycytominer repo for more details. 
```

Reviewer 2: one-sentence-per-line and minor edits

The steps from Level 3 to Level 4b can be found in the [profile_cells](https://github.com/broadinstitute/lincs-cell-painting/blob/master/profiles/profile_cells.py) script, the steps for spherizing can be found in [this script](https://github.com/michaelbornholdt/lincs-cell-painting/blob/master/spherized_profiles/spherize-batch-effects.ipynb), and the final aggregation to the consensus data is found in [this notebook](https://github.com/broadinstitute/lincs-cell-painting/blob/master/consensus/build-consensus-signatures.ipynb).  

Note here that we do not include the intermediate step of generating `.sqlite` files per plate using a tool called [cytominer-database](https://github.com/cytomining/cytominer-database).
This repository and workflow begins after we applied cytominer-database.

> ### Aggregation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Aggregation

```

> The [aggregation method](https://github.com/cytomining/pycytominer/blob/master/pycytominer/aggregate.py) is used twice in the workflow at this point and for the creation fot the consensus. Here, the median of all cells within a well is aggregated to one profiler per well. The aggregation method doesn't persist the metadata which is why this step is followed by an annotation step to add the MOA data and others. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [aggregation method](https://github.com/cytomining/pycytominer/blob/master/pycytominer/aggregate.py) is used twice in the workflow: (1) at this point and (2) for the creation of the consensus profiles.
Here, the median of all cells within a well is aggregated to one profile per well.
The aggregation method doesn't persist the metadata which is why this step is followed by an annotation step to add the metadata (including MOA). 
```

one sentence per line and minor edits

> 
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Removing excess lines

> ### Normalization

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Normalization

```

> [Normalization](https://github.com/cytomining/pycytominer/blob/master/pycytominer/normalize.py) can be done via different methods and over all wells in a plate or only the negative controls (DMSOs). In this case, the `mad_robustize` method was used and both the output of the whole-plate and the DMSO normalization were saved in this repository. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Normalization](https://github.com/cytomining/pycytominer/blob/master/pycytominer/normalize.py) can be done via different methods and over all wells in a plate or only the negative controls (DMSOs).
In this case, the `mad_robustize` method was used and both the output of the whole-plate and the DMSO normalization were saved in this repository. 
```

It is important to note that the normalization is done over each plate but not over the full batch.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> ### Spherizing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Spherizing

```

> [Spherizing](https://github.com/cytomining/pycytominer/blob/c0d3e86aa64de8b1c6c3213d48937aab8e9d1c1d/pycytominer/operations/transform.py#L13) (aka whitening) is a transformation of the data that tries to correct batch effects. Within Pycytominer, Spherizing is a method within the normalization function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Spherizing](https://github.com/cytomining/pycytominer/blob/c0d3e86aa64de8b1c6c3213d48937aab8e9d1c1d/pycytominer/operations/transform.py#L13) (aka whitening) is a transformation of the data that tries to correct batch effects.
Within Pycytominer, Spherizing is a method within the normalization function.
```

Reviewer 2: one-sentence-per-line

> Unlike the other normalizations, spherizing is done on the full batch (all plates). Check the code for details and relevant papers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unlike the other normalizations, we spherize the data using the full batch (all plates).
Check the code for details and relevant papers.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> ### Feature selection

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Feature selection

```

The [feature_select](https://github.com/cytomining/pycytominer/blob/master/pycytominer/feature_select.py) method incorporates `["variance_threshold", "correlation_threshold", "drop_na_columns", "drop_outliers"]`. 
These functions were developed to drop redundant and invariant features and to improve post processing.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> ### Consensus

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Consensus

```

> The [consensus](https://github.com/cytomining/pycytominer/blob/master/pycytominer/consensus.py) function is another step of aggregation and completes the pipeline. The normalized and feature selected data (4b) is aggregated via Median or MODZ to consensus data. This means that each of the five replicates are combined  to one profile representing one pertubation with a given dose.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [consensus](https://github.com/cytomining/pycytominer/blob/master/pycytominer/consensus.py) function is another step of aggregation and completes the pipeline.
The normalized and feature selected data (4b) is aggregated via Median or MODZ to consensus data.
This means that each of the five replicates are combined to one profile representing one perturbation with a given dose.  
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> ### Normalization vs Spherizing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Normalization vs Spherizing

```

While having the same overall goal, these two processes target different artifacts:

> The normalization step simply aligns all plates by scaling each plates values to a "unit height". The specific transformation used is [`RobustMad`](https://github.com/cytomining/pycytominer/blob/372f1086318841670a916f20334333b06e6b84c9/pycytominer/operations/transform.py#L111).  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The normalization step simply aligns all plates by scaling each plates values to a "unit height". 
The specific transformation used is [`RobustMad`](https://github.com/cytomining/pycytominer/blob/372f1086318841670a916f20334333b06e6b84c9/pycytominer/operations/transform.py#L111).  
```

On the other hand, we use a spherize (a.k.a. whiten) transformation to adjust for plate and plate position effects (e.g. some plates may influence the data while the position within a plate could also create artifacts).

> The spherize transform adjusts for plate position effects by transforming the profile data such that the DMSO profiles are left with an identity covariance matrix. Note that this operation is done on the full dataset, not per plate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The spherize transform adjusts for plate position effects by transforming the profile data such that the DMSO profiles are left with an identity covariance matrix.
Note that this operation is done on the full dataset, not per plate.
```

See [spherize-batch-effects.ipynb](spherized_profiles/spherize-batch-effects.ipynb) for implementation details.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
